---
layout: post
title: 'Our Servers or Yours: Thinking through deployment options'
author: Jed Goldstein
author_url: https://github.com/jedbgold
author_image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/jedbgold
tags: [how-to, tips]
featured: true
---

Zandile is a program manager at an iNGO and she needs to use CommCare, DHIS2,
and OpenFn for an upcoming public health project. She understands that all three
pieces of software can be deployed locally, or accessed as SaaS (Software as a
Service).

Essentially, Zandile needs to decide if she would like to run the software on
someone else’s servers (SaaS), or on her organization’s own servers (deployed
locally). Before making a decision she outlines the basic, non-technical
considerations for both options.

<!--truncate-->

## What is SaaS?

SaaS is software that is installed and _runs_ on computers maintained by
software professionals, rather than on your own computer. While those computers
might be anywhere in the world, typically you'll access and _use_ this software via
the Internet.

### Some benefits of SaaS

With SaaS, the software vendor is responsible for the expenses of managing and
monitoring all of the technical components and issues associated with the
software. This means that Zandile’s iNGO will not be responsible for updating
the software to ensure compliance with new security regulations, maintaining the
servers, backing up the data, purchasing and managing uninterrupted power
supplies, and providing a team of physical security guards to protect the
computers and data therein against physical theft.

Going the SaaS route is often faster and more secure, because you do not need to
develop expertise in "DevOps" or hire IT and physical security specialists. This
option also provides the greatest amount of flexibility & scalability– because
the SaaS provider is able to deliver more or less computing power, storage, and
bandwidth—right when it’s needed.

Having smaller setup costs (you don't have to grow a software delivery company
of your own) often makes this a more economical choice for many, though SaaS
will always come with some sort of ongoing fee—a price per month or year that
goes to the vendor to compensate for the time and money they'll spend to ensure
your software works properly.

## What is Local Deployment?

Unlike the SaaS option, local deployment means installing and running software
on your own computers—typically on your organization’s servers.

### Some benefits of Local Deployment

If a SaaS provider doesn't offer hosting in your country and your government
doesn't allow your data to reside on foreign servers (i.e., you're not allowed
to use things like Gmail, WhatsApp or Facebook for communicating sensitive
information) then local deployment allows you to use tools like CommCare, DHIS2,
and OpenFn while adhering to government data sovereignty regulations.

Local deployment also provides your organization with complete ownership of the
end-to-end system. Your IT team will be personally responsible for ensuring that
the software works, is maintained, is secure, etc. If your organization does not
already have an IT team in place, then this can become a costly headache, but
for a large organization with embedded IT experience, local deployment often
makes sense.

Ultimately, being able to directly hire and fire the people who are responsible
for your software's proper functioning can be very useful. It means you have
complete responsibility for whether or not the solution succeeds.

If you've already got the teams in place (security, DevOps, etc.) then this
option can be more economical in the long run. With a very good DevOps team,
maintaining an extra piece of software might only occupy 20% of a
full-time-employee's salary. For your security guards, if the software is
installed in the same physical location it's possible that your costs won't
increase at all. While there will be very high setup costs, over time you may
realize cost savings by running an efficient software delivery unit within your
organization that spreads its focus around a number of projects.

## Zandile's Decision

In this fictional case, data residency is a concern—her data is sensitive or
contains PII—and CommCare, DHIS2 and OpenFn do not provide hosting in the
country she's located. Zandile's organization has a large, experienced IT team
that has managed high-availability software projects for many years... they're
pros. While they anticipate that the setup costs will be quite high (around
$60000 and several months for this set of deployments) they plan on using this
software for the next 5 years and have determined that they'll recoup a
significant portion of that setup cost by not having to pay license fees for
SaaS. They go with local deployment.

## Which Deployment Option is Best for your organization?

The answer is: "it depends", but if your organization has never managed local
software deployments, then we recommend going the SaaS approach. SaaS systems,
like the one OpenFn and CommCare offer, are simply going to be more secure, more
stable, and more scalable for the money.

Crucially, you can always start with SaaS (most tools even offer a free tier)
and then decide later to invest in the big startup costs of a local deployment
if the license fees for the SaaS feel high enough to make local deployment more
economical over the long term. After a few months or years on the SaaS, you'll
likely be in a better position to know if you want to continue using the
software for 5-10 years.

Should you need any help with your decision though please do not hesitate to
contact OpenFn.
